---
layout: post
title: Tip-a-day - Making a nice home
description: Using make for ${HOME}keeping
categories: [abook, home, make, shell, tad, tips, vim]
---

Back in "'Kick me' birthday reminders":/2009/09/26/TaD-Kick_me_birthday_reminders.html I said:

bq. You could trigger a rebuild in your @~/.bashrc@ before you call @rem@ to see the reminders, so they are always up to date at login. Or, you could be like me and have a post commit hook for "git":http://www.git-scm.com/ to manage this… because you are keeping your home directory version controlled as a sanity measure I hope!

Today, Stuart Grady asked me in a private mail:

bq. Okay, at which point is the "Tip of the Day" thingy going to be about using hooks and "make":http://www.gnu.org/software/make/make.html in @$HOME@?

I'll take the hint and look at @make@.  For the purposes of this post we're going to pretend we haven't read "recursive make considered harmful":http://miller.emu.id.au/pmiller/books/rmch/ as I don't heed its advice for the @Makefile@ I have in my home directory.  That said, let's have a look at what can be found in my current top-level @Makefile@.

h3. Permissions

I keep my home directory version controlled with @git@, but git out of the box doesn't maintain permissions on files beyond the executable bit.  There are plenty of ways around this including using external tools such as "etckeeper":http://joey.kitenet.net/code/etckeeper/, but I prefer the simple approach of setting the permissions when they're needed:

{% highlight make %}
PRIVATE_FILES := .abook/addressbook .gnupg/secring.gpg .mailfilter .msmtprc \
	.ssh/id_rsa
PRIVATE_DIRS := .gnupg

fix-perms: $(PRIVATE_FILES) $(PRIVATE_DIRS)
	$(info - Removing extra read permissions from private files and directories)
	chmod 600 $(PRIVATE_FILES)
	chmod 700 $(PRIVATE_DIRS)
{% endhighlight %}
p>. "Fork this code":http://gist.github.com/208207

If this rule is called after a @git pull@ is issued the files always have the correct permissions.

h3. vim hacks

I also call @make@ in some subdirectories, the most interesting one is probably for @.vim@:

{% highlight make %}
CTAGS := exuberant-ctags


TARGETS := $(patsubst /usr/lib/%, tags/%.ctags, $(wildcard /usr/lib/python*)) \
           doc/tags

all: $(TARGETS)

tags/%.ctags: /usr/lib/%
	$(CTAGS) --exclude=test_* --exclude=tests.py --exclude=test.py \
		--exclude=*/test/* --exclude=*/tests/* --languages=python \
		-R -f $@ $<

doc/tags: $(filter-out doc/tags, $(wildcard doc/*))
	vim -X -u NONE -c 'helptags $(dir $@)' -c ':q' </dev/null &>/dev/null

clean:
	rm -f $(TARGETS)
{% endhighlight %}
p>. "Fork this code":http://gist.github.com/208209

The values in @$(TARGETS)@ generated inside the @patsubst@ creates a list of filenames to use with "ctags":http://ctags.sourceforge.net.  The rule creates a different @ctags@ file for each installed "python":http://www.python.org version.  In the rule to make the @ctags@ files we specifically exclude test files as they aren't often useful in "omni-completion":http://vimdoc.sourceforge.net/htmldoc/version7.html#new-omni-completion, and they significantly pollute the tags database for normal use.

The final entry in @$(TARGETS)@ simply updates the tag lists for "help files":http://vimdoc.sourceforge.net/htmldoc/various.html#:helptags installed in @~/.vim/doc@.

h3. Documentation

The final subdirectory @Makefile@ we're going to look at is actually called in a number of different directories to create HTML versions of "reStructuredText":http://docutils.sourceforge.net/rst.html files.

{% highlight make %}
GENERATED = $(patsubst %.rst, %.html, $(wildcard *.rst))

all: $(GENERATED)

$(GENERATED): %.html: %.rst
	rst2html.py $< $@
{% endhighlight %}
p>. "Fork this code":http://gist.github.com/208210

If we call the above @Makefile@ from our @git@ hooks after any pull or merge we always have up to date processed versions of documents.

