---
layout: post
title: Accessibility statement
description: Some information on the accessibility features on this site
categories: [accessibility, jnrowe, site]
date: 2009-10-04
---

h3. Introduction

This site is designed with accessibility in mind, from keyboard only access to screen readers.  Of course, I'm fallible and if you notice anything which doesn't work right or feel there is some improvement I could make "drop me a mail":jnrowe@gmail.com and I'll try to correct the problem or at the very least improve the situation.

h3. Access keys

The following access keys are defined:

|_. Key |_. Purpose |
| 0 | Jump to the accessibility statement |
| 1 | Jump to the home page |
| 2 | Skip navigation and jump to the main content of the page |
| 4 | Jump to the site search box |
| 8 | Jump to the licensing information |
| 9 | Submit feedback |

The chosen access keys are taken from the excellent "dive into accessibility":http://diveintoaccessibility.org/ book by "Mark Pilgrim":http://diveintomark.org.

The access keys require a browser specific key combination:

* Mac Firefox - Hold @CTRL@ and press the desired key
* Linux Firefox - Hold @ALT@ and press the desired key
* Opera - Press and release @Shift+Escape@ followed by the desired key
* Safari - Hold @CTRL@ and press the desired key

p(note). I'll happily update this table with information about Microsoft's Internet Explorer if somebody with access to it supplies me with the necessary information.

{% comment %}
Internet Explorer possibly uses Alt, need to check
{% endcomment %}

Every page on this site also includes the ID @jnrowe-ukfsn-org@ on the @body@ element to allow for simple site-specific user restyling.

h3. Standards compliance

The markup used on this site should be 100% valid "XHTML 1.0":http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/, and uses semantic design wherever possible.  If you find a page which fails to "validate":http://validator.w3.org/, or incorrectly used semantic tags, it **is** an error and I'll fix it if you point it out.

h3. Acronyms and terms

There is an automatically updated list of "terms and acronyms":/glossary.html used on this site available, and a button to jump straight to it should appear in the  navigation bar of modern browsers.

