---
layout: post
title: A few months with the n900
description: Looking back at the Nokia n900
categories: [n900, nokia, phone]
---

Having just sent my "n900":http://maemo.nokia.com/n900/ back I figured I should write a few words about it.

I should state upfront that I did not pay for the device, and that may have coloured my opinions about it.  Perhaps I would have scored the good and bad points differently if it had been paid for out of my own pocket.

h3. The Good

There are many, many things to like about the n900.  Here are just a few off the top of my head:

* The hardware feels sturdy, and looks clean.
* The software is well implemented, which in my opinion has been the case since the "n770":http://europe.nokia.com/find-products/devices/nokia-770.
* Being able to code with "Python":http://www.python.org, "mono":http://www.mono-project.com/ or even "vala":http://live.gnome.org/Vala is really nice.  That in itself is probably reason enough to choose it, if you're a coder.
* Using it as a rather expensive remote control for your desktop is quite cool.
* The GPSr is good, and locks reasonably quickly.  The inbuilt mapping software leaves a lot to be desired, but there are plenty of replacements available.
* The back button in the browser opens a pretty history list by default, which is a nice UI touch.
* Making the device spit out a Star Trek communicator sound when you flip it via the accelerometer is quite fun, but shouldn't be done in "normal" non-geeky company.
* "mmpc":http://mmpc.garage.maemo.org/ is a good client for "mpd":http://www.musicpd.org, which is even useful when you're sitting at the machine running @mpd@ as you don't need to switch windows.
* It plays every file format I've thrown on it, and there is no conversion nonsense to do.
* The front 640x480 camera is refreshingly nice, producing nice clear images.
* The FM receiver is good, and manages to hold a signal well.  It is a nice fallback from playing heavily compressed audio when the device is running low on battery.
* The FM transmitter works well although only over very, very short distances.

h3. The Bad

There are very few bad points about the device in my opinion, but here are a couple of things that annoyed me:

* It would be nice if the microSD slot was always accessible, for quickly transfering data.
* The high spec rear camera doesn't always produce the quality of images you've come to expect from Nokia devices.
* At close to 200 grams I find it a little too heavy for day to day use.
* The "browser":http://browser.garage.maemo.org/ uses the gecko rendering engine, with some features I need like SVG disabled.  A "webkit":http://webkit.org/ browser would make a nice replacement, and there are various third-party browsers using @webkit@ available.

h3. The Ugly

There is only one point here, but it is a very serious one...

* Battery life isn't very good, lasting less than a day when you're making calls, browsing and using the media player is very common.  Double capacity batteries are available from other suppliers though, and if the device was mine I would have probably bought one.

h3. Conculsions

All in all it is a great device, and I'd probably recommend it to hackers and users alike.  Had Google not given me a "Nexus One":http://www.google.com/phone I would probably be looking to buy a n900 for myself.

The sad fact is I think Google have won me over simply because I'm allowed to keep the Nexus One.  It feels much easier to invest time in to a device you get to keep, then one you're asked to send back after a few months.  I can't seem to escape the feeling that because Google are giving a Nexus One to practically anybody who can pronounce the word Google they'll win over all the developer mindshare that Nokia have gained with their previous tablets, and I really hope it isn't the beginning of the end for the fantastic hackable n-series devices.
