.. post:: 2020-12-16
   :tags: adventofcode, coding, puzzles
   :image: 1

Advent of Code 2020
===================

I’m done.

I’ve given up on |AoC| for this year.  I’m writing this as a journal entry,
more for myself than others.  You’ve been warned!

.. note::

    As always `Advent of Code`_ is fun, even when it doesn’t always feel like
    it.  If you’re enjoying it, *or* currently screaming at it, `tip the
    creator`_ so that we can smile and shout at it next year.

Why quit?
---------

I’m in the habit of quitting early now.  Each year I spank through the puzzles
until I lose interest, give up, and then complete the puzzles through the
Winterval break.

The tipping point for me this year was `day 16`_, the text was just
impenetrable to me.  It literally took me four times as long to parse the
description as it did to code the solution.

I have 32 stars for completing both parts of every day so far this year, but
I’m taking a break until I have a bit more downtime.

Day 1
-----

* `Report Repair <https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/1>`__

I jumped in with my :ref:`toolset from previous years <test-runner-label>`,
so my solution for part one is::

    from itertools import combinations
    from typing import List

    from utils import aoc_run, read_data


    @aoc_run({
            '1721\n979\n366\n299\n675\n1456': 514579,
        },
        800139
    )
    @read_data
    def part1(inputs: List[str]) -> int:
        return [x * y for x, y in combinations(map(int, inputs), 2)
                if x + y == 2020][0]

The ``aoc_run`` decorator *still* configures a test runner using the examples
from the description, and if provided the second argument confirms my output
when I’m refactoring the code.  If the second argument isn’t provided, such as
when you’re writing your code, it will output the result for you to submit.

I didn’t — and still don’t — like the actual meat, but that is the sort of
thing that ends up in a |REPL| session when you’re watching the clock.

Given that part 2 was simply extending the criteria to matching three numbers,
we just need to change the ``r`` parameter to the
:func:`~itertools.combinations` call.

In hindsight I’d rather see something like::

    return next(
        reduce(mul, comb)
        for xs in combinations(map(int, numbers), length)
        if sum(xs) == total
    )

However, it is unclear to me whether that is actually clearer in the general
case, or simply the eye I have given my current daytime project.

Day 2
-----

* `Password Philosophy <https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/2>`__

A little input parsing required today, because I don’t need `two problems`_
I reached for :meth:`~str.translate` and :meth:`~str.split`::

    _UNFORMAT = str.maketrans({':': ' ', '-': ' '})


    def extract_data(s: str) -> Tuple[List[int], str, str]:
        *ps, char, password = s.translate(_UNFORMAT).split()
        ps = [int(p) for p in ps]
        return ps, char, password

Here we configure a simple translator that replaces the field separators in the
input with a space, allowing :meth:`~str.split` to break each line for us.

Plenty of other solutions are clearly available, such as a regular expressions::

    matcher = re.compile(r'(?P<min>\d+)-(?P<max>\d+) (?P<char>.): (?P<password>.*)')

or even :pypi:`parse`::

    min, max, char, password = parse.parse('{:.2d}-{:.2d} {:.1l}: {}', line)

It doesn’t make much difference for the inputs in this case, but it should be
noted that :pypi:`parse` is considerably slower than the regular expression and
the more manual ``extract_data`` function.

Which leaves us with a simple loop for part one::

    def part1(inputs: List[str]) -> int:
        valid = 0
        for l in inputs:
            (low, high), char, password = extract_data(l)
            count = Counter(password)[char]
            if low <= count <= high:
                valid += 1
        return valid

Part two is largely the same, with a slight tweak::

    def part2(inputs: List[str]) -> int:
        valid = 0
        for l in inputs:
            (p1, p2), char, password = extract_data(l)
            if (password[p1 - 1] == char) ^ (password[p2 - 1] == char):
                valid += 1
        return valid

My admission here is that my first attempt failed to spot that we wanted an
XOR_ here, and I failed in spite of the fact my editor `shows disjunction
symbolically`_.  *And yes*, the “\ **exactly one of these positions**\ ” text
really is in **bold** on that page.

.. image:: /.images/2020-12-02-symbolic.png
    :alt: vim showing bug in day 2’s solution

Day 3
-----

* `Toboggan Trajectory <https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/3>`__

We’re walking a wrapping map from our input this time.  There are heaps of ways
to model this, I went with the quickest I could think of::

    from itertools import count


    def traverse_map(inputs: List[str], step_x: int, step_y: int) -> int:
        height, width = len(inputs), len(inputs[0])
        return sum(
            1
            for pos_x, pos_y in zip(
                count(step_x, step_x), range(step_y, height, step_y)
            )
            if inputs[pos_y][pos_x % width] == '#'
        )


    def part1(inputs: List[str]) -> int:
        return traverse_map(inputs, 3, 1)

Depending on how you feel about generator expressions you may prefer a more
literal loop::

    def traverse_map(inputs: List[str], step_x: int, step_y: int) -> int:
        height, width = len(inputs), len(inputs[0])
        trees_hit = 0
        pos_x, pos_y = step_x, step_y
        while pos_y < height:
            if inputs[pos_y][pos_x % width] == '#':
                trees_hit += 1
            pos_x += step_x
            pos_y += step_y
        return trees_hit

I find the :func:`sum` far more readable, but it is definitely a matter of
taste.  I know that taste doesn’t translate well to my co-workers, and
I wouldn’t commit a function like that in to a shared repository(no matter how
much I prefer it).

The inability to use tuple unpacking alongside ``+=`` makes this annoying in my
eyes too.  ``pos_x, pos_y += step_x, step_y`` would be far nicer.  A simple
alternative is either to create a point class or abuse complex numbers to hold
the x and y coordinates.

Part two requires simply performing the same procedure with a few different
step values.  I had seen that coming, and was already prepared in my
``traverse_map()`` function::

    def part2(inputs: List[str]) -> int:
        return reduce(
            mul,
            [
                traverse_map(inputs, step_x, step_y)
                for step_x, step_y in [(1, 1), (3, 1), (5, 1), (7, 1), (1, 2)]
            ],
        )

Day 4
-----

* `Passport Processing <https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/4>`__

I’m lazy, really lazy.  Instead of doing The Right Thing™ and making
``read_data`` support returning paragraphs, I simply rejoined the inputs I had
already split for this puzzle::

    def part1(inputs: List[str]) -> int:
        passports = []
        for passport in '\n'.join(inputs).split('\n\n'):
            passports.append(dict(chunk.split(':') for chunk in passport.split()))

and with the passport data parsed, it was simply a matter of iterating over
them while ignoring the ``cid`` field::

        fields = {'byr', 'iyr', 'eyr', 'hgt', 'hcl', 'ecl', 'pid', 'cid'}
        return sum(
            1
            for passport in passports
            if set(passport.keys()) | {'cid', } == fields
        )

Every year I tell myself I should use a different language for |AOC|, but so
often Python simply provides exactly the tools you’ll want.  Today it is the
:obj:`set`, other days it is the :mod:`itertools` module

Part two is just a huge collection of ``if`` statements wrapped in a for-loop,
mostly implemented with paste and a vim_ macro.

I did toy with the idea of a quick class to handle the passports, but even with
:pypi:`attrs` all the validators would have significantly ballooned the
implementation.  Even the birth year would have been a heap of lines::

    @attr.s
    class Passport:
        byr: int = attr.ib(metadata={'name': 'Birth Year'})

        @byr.validator
        def byr_check(self, attribute, value):
            if not 1920 <= int(value) <= 2002:
                raise ValueError(f'Invalid birth year {value!r}')

Day 5
-----

* `Binary Boarding <https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/5>`__

This is one of those “do it right or do it quick” puzzles, I leaned toward “do
it quick”.  Taking advantage of :meth:`~str.translate` again, we can just
pretend the characters are binary representations of the value::

    CODE_TABLE = str.maketrans({'F': '1', 'B': '0', 'L': '1', 'R': '0'})


    def decode_pass(code: str) -> int:
        row = int(code[:7].translate(CODE_TABLE), 2) ^ 127
        col = int(code[7:].translate(CODE_TABLE), 2) ^ 7
        return (row * 8) + col

With that part one is simple as::

    max(map(decode_pass, inputs))

Similarly, part two is just a dirty loop over the seats in the |REPL|::

    seats = list(map(decode_pass, inputs))
    for seat in range(min(seats), max(seats)):
        if seat in seats:
            continue
        if seat - 1 in seats and seat + 1 in seats:
            break
    print(seat)

Day 6
-----

* `Custom Customs <https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/6>`__

My earlier laziness comes back to haunt me here.  I should have just made
reading paragraphs a thing on day four.  I took the hint and changed my
``read_data`` decorator to support a separator.  With that we’re a one-liner
away from an answer::

    from functools import reduce
    from operator import or_


    @read_data('\n\n')
    def part1(inputs: List[str]) -> int:
        return sum(len(reduce(or_, map(set, group.splitlines())))
                   for group in inputs)

This definitely feels like cheating, as basically all we’re doing here is
calling :class:`set` to uniquify the inputs.  Again, I wouldn’t commit this to
a shared repository, but it is how I |REPL| in private.

Part two is almost identical, we’re just replacing the operand for
:func:`~functools.reduce`::

    from operator import and_

    @read_data('\n\n')
    def part2(inputs: List[str]) -> int:
        return sum(len(reduce(and_, map(set, group.splitlines())))
                   for group in inputs)

If you’ve made it this far, I wonder if *you* can guess what language my
current daytime project is written in.  There is a small prize in it for the
first person to correctly guess based on the solutions to these puzzles.

Day 7
-----

* `Handy Haversacks <https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/7>`__

Hmm, we’re back in :pypi:`networkx` territory again.  Every year a puzzle pops
up where just knowing what :pypi:`networkx` is gives you the answer, today is
the first such one this year.

I parsed the input text using a dirty little loop::

    from re import findall


    def parse_rules(inputs: List[str]) -> Dict[str, List[Dict[str, int]]]:
        rules = {}
        for line in inputs:
            name = ' '.join(line.split()[:2])
            rules[name] = {k: int(v) for v, k in findall(r'(\d+) (\w+ \w+)', line)}
        return rules

We’re creating a dictionary where the key is first two words of a line, and the
value is a dictionary which is basically a self-reference and a count.  The
:func:`~re.findall` call is just pulling out all matches of a number followed
by two words.

Dumping that data in to a :pypi:`networkx` ``DiGraph`` object allows us simply
count the ancestors using the, ehm… ``networkx.ancestors()`` function.

We didn’t really need the full data in our graph here, but all |AOC| players
know we’re going to need the bag counts for part two.

Even if you’d prefer not to use graphviz_ or :pypi:`networkx`, you could write
a simple recursive solution for part two such as::

    def walk_bags(rules, bag):
        return 1 + sum(walk_bags(rules, bag_name) * bag_count
                       for bag_name, bag_count in rules[bag].items())

.. note::

    I suspect I would have made the ballooning off-by-one error if I had chosen
    this route on the day.

I had assumed the input would have been crazy enough to break Python’s default
recursion limit, but it looks like we were nowhere near it.  Things aren’t
getting evil… yet.

Day 8
-----

* `Handheld Halting <https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/8>`__

Memories of the IntCode interpreter from last year immediately entered my mind
here.  Should we be making a generic virtual machine straight away to speed up
the following days?

There is actually very little of interest in today’s solution, the only oddity
at all was that I added a branch for the ``nop`` for some reason.  It is
a no-operation_, how could it possibly need a handler?

The issue I did have trouble with was the runtime being far too long.  My
initial effort in the |REPL| took 17 seconds, and that felt *very* wrong.  On
closer inspection I was stupidly re-parsing the input on each loop for part
two, but even that shouldn’t have been that slow.  Let’s ask hyperfine_

.. code-block:: console

    $ hyperfine 'python3 day08.py'
    Benchmark #1: python3 day08.py
    Time (mean ± σ):     17.825 s ±  1.145 s    [User: 15.329 s, System: 0.017 s]
    Range (min … max):   16.104 s … 19.153 s    10 runs

Kicking the parsing out of the loop is a huge improvement:

.. code-block:: console

    $ hyperfine 'python3 day08.py'
    Benchmark #1: python3 day08.py
    Time (mean ± σ):     238.9 ms ±   5.1 ms    [User: 214.2 ms, System: 13.8 ms]
    Range (min … max):   234.9 ms … 253.7 ms    11 runs

Turns out using :pypi:`parse` to grab the data is quite expensive.  Switching
to regular string splitting like so::

    def parse():
        insts = []
        for line in inputs:
            op, val_s = line.split()
            insts.append((op, int(val_s)))
        return insts

is *much* faster:

.. code-block:: console

    $ hyperfine 'python3 day08.py'
    Benchmark #1: python3 day08.py
    Time (mean ± σ):     143.7 ms ±  24.4 ms    [User: 115.4 ms, System: 14.5 ms]
    Range (min … max):   132.9 ms … 239.6 ms    19 runs

I suspect I wouldn’t have noticed the impact of :pypi:`parse`, if I hadn’t
messed up the parsing in a rush to score on the local leaderboard.  However,
once you start poking around there is a multitude of rabbit holes to climb in
to if you want to extract some speed.

Day 9
-----

* `Encoding Error <https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/9>`__

My laziness pushed me to produce a really awful solution for part one::

    from itertools import combinations


    def find_invalid(data: List[int], buf_len: int) -> int:
        val = 0
        for pos, val in enumerate(data[buf_len:], buf_len):
            possibles = set(map(sum, combinations(data[pos - buf_len:pos], 2)))
            if val not in possibles:
                break
        return val

For each number it generates a complete set of possible values, which could
be summing as many as 300 values on each loop.  I’m not proud of it, but this
is what time limited puzzles make you do.

I did at least use a sliding sum for part two, although to be frank even
using a filthy and dumb solution wouldn’t have been an issue as the problem
space is small enough.  To prove that to myself I’ve just written a version
without a sliding sum::

    invalid = find_invalid(data, buf_len)
    for x in range(len(data)):
        for y in range(len(data) - x):
            if sum(data[x:y]) == invalid:
                block = data[x:y]
                print(min(block) + max(block))

The above needs a hyperfine_ benchmark just to spot the difference in runtime
to the sliding sum version.  And you can even bring it to within spitting
distance with an early exit::

    from itertools import accumulate, takewhile


    invalid = find_invalid(data, 25)
    for start in range(len(data)):
        try:
            end = next(
                end
                for end, val in takewhile(
                    lambda x: x[1] <= invalid,
                    enumerate(accumulate(data[start:]), start),
                )
                if val == invalid
            )
        except StopIteration:
            continue
        else:
            block = data[start:end]
            break
    print(min(block) + max(block))

But… Don’t. Do. It.

Day 10
------

* `Adapter Array <https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/10>`__

Part one was a *lot* of text to say sort the list::

    @read_data
    def part1(inputs: List[str]) -> int:
        adapters = sorted(int(line) for line in inputs)
        res = [
            x - y
            for x, y in zip(
                adapters + [adapters[-1] + 3],
                [0, ] + adapters,
            )
        ]
        return res.count(1) * res.count(3)

Part two felt the same, a lot of text but a line or two in the |REPL|::

    chain = [1, ] + [0, ] * adapters[-1]
    for adapter in adapters:
        chain[adapter] = sum(chain[max(adapter - 3, 0):adapter])
    print(chain[adapter])

As you can probably tell I wasn’t particularly happy with this day.  I’ve
wondered if I was just lucky with my input, but it doesn’t appear so.

Day 11
------

* `Seating System <https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/11>`__

Argghh, I misread part one and accidentally solved part two.

Much like :doc:`other years <advent_of_code>` there is time when :pypi:`numpy`
quickly comes in to its own.  Today is one of those.  Being able to address our
floor plan with ``array[x1:x2,y1:y2]`` via :pypi:`numpy` saves us needing to
dig around manually when looking for neighbouring cells.

I think the only marginally interesting snippet here was handling of the
toggling::

    if cell:
        if sum(neighbours) >= 4:
            new_plan[row_no][col_no] = False
    else:
        if not any(neighbours):
            new_plan[row_no][col_no] = True

The ``sum(neighbours)`` call is taking advantage of Python treating ``True`` as
1, such that ``sum([True, True, False])`` equals 2.

For part two, :pypi:`numpy` provides a `diagonal`_ method which we can then
filter for a given value.  In my case it just looks for the first
non-\ ``None``, and then it is simply a matter of changing the four to a five
in our seat toggling branch.

:pypi:`numpy` *is* cheating, but not using it is needless busywork.

Day 12
------

* `Rain Risk <https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/12>`__

Move along, nothing to see here.  Huge, ugly multi-armed if-statement.  Hat
tip to my co-worker Tim, who used :pypi:`pygame` to lazy up the position
calculations but then proceeded to turn it in to a pretty little animation.

I suspect part two of this puzzle would be difficult if you don’t scan your
input file quickly before starting.  Given that we’re only seeing right
angles, we can just twiddle our waypoint with a rotation matrix.  I’ll admit
I was about to break out the trigonometry here, but luckily I did quick
:program:`grep` of the ``L`` and ``R`` entries.  So, we’re left with::

    if (action == 'L' and value == 90) or (
        action == 'R' and value == 270
    ):
        wpt_x, wpt_y = -wpt_y, wpt_x
    elif value == 180:
        wpt_x, wpt_y = -wpt_x, -wpt_y
    elif (action == 'L' and value == 270) or (
        action == 'R' and value == 90
    ):
        wpt_x, wpt_y = wpt_y, -wpt_x

.. tip::

    Like earlier puzzles it perhaps make sense to use a pre-written generic
    point class here, or reach for complex numbers to store the **x** and
    **y** coordinates.

Day 13
------

* `Shuttle Search <https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/13>`__

This was a strange one.  If you’ve been playing along at home for the past few
years, you’ll immediately say “oh, `Chinese remainder theorem`_ again”.  That
is my tip here, at least skim your previous solutions towards the end of
November.

We’re almost upon the second week here, and the competition is getting
considerably more difficult.  However, you can significantly lighten your own
load.  Lean on pre-written libraries like :pypi:`numpy` and :pypi:`networkx`,
brush up on :mod:`itertools` and use sensible names for variables.

“Sensible names for variables?” I hear you say, but yeah.  The simple ability
to ag_ or :program:`grep` previous competition’s answers is a literal super
power.  And, doing so is far easier if you’re not staring at reams of
``i``/``x``/``n`` usage.

Day 14
------

* `Docking Data <https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/14>`__

My admission for today is that I quickly resorted to type ping-pong here, it is
just *too* easy::

    value_s = '{:036b}'.format(value)
    value = int(''.join(value_s), 2)

I think my only insight in this puzzle was that you should work in reverse,
doing so allows you to skip performing a bunch of writes.  It is clear that
only the final write to an address will matter, so keep a seen state and ignore
duplicate memory addresses.

.. note::

    *My plan is to get back to this once I’ve completed the final puzzles.*
    I need a break from this as much I wanted a break from working on the
    puzzles themselves, and the two week point seems like as good a time as any
    for a break.

Tips
----

I’m mostly repeating my tips from :doc:`last year <advent_of_code_2019>`, the
:doc:`year before <advent_of_code_2018>`, and the :doc:`year before that
<advent_of_code>`.

Don’t use this as an excuse to learn a new language.  The puzzles aren’t really
complicated enough to learn a new language beyond basic grammar.  You may as
well use it as an excuse to explore new features in a language you already
know, or as an excuse to explore the standard library of your chosen language
some more.

Read the problems *deeply*.  The artificial nature of the puzzles often elides
important information, or at least can often feel that way.  These *are*
puzzles so you should expect some vexation, and skimming for speed will make
this worse!

If you’re going for the leaderboard you need to be *really* fast, so: Use fast
languages, be *all over* your chosen weapon’s standard library, and use your
editor’s snippets_ well.  **Every**. **Second**. **Counts**.

And finally, keep your old solutions around either in files or in your |REPL|’s
history as you’ll probably end up revisiting them, if not this year then maybe
in the next.

Hopes for 2021?
---------------

Repeating number one from every year so far: That the options to pay for it are
better next year.  Each year I have to find a friend to make a donation in my
place as the payment options are weak.  It would be nice to not have to do so,
and limiting payments to PayPal and Coinbase *must* be putting others off
a donation entirely.

Number two?  That it returns.  I know I’ve moaned a couple of times in this
document, but that is the joy of puzzles.  If they’re not annoying you then
they’re not challenging enough.

.. |AoC| replace:: :abbr:`AoC (Advent of Code)`

.. _Advent of Code: http://adventofcode.com/2020
.. _tip the creator: https://adventofcode.com/2020/support
.. _day 16: https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/16
.. _two problems: http://regex.info/blog/2006-09-15/247
.. _XOR: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exclusive_or
.. _shows disjunction symbolically: https://github.com/ehamberg/vim-cute-python
.. _Chinese remainder theorem: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_remainder_theorem
.. _ag: https://github.com/ggreer/the_silver_searcher
.. _vim: https://www.vim.org/
.. _graphviz: https://www.graphviz.org/
.. _hyperfine: https://github.com/sharkdp/hyperfine
.. _snippets: https://github.com/SirVer/ultisnips/
.. _no-operation: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/NOP_(code)
.. _diagonal: https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.diagonal.html
